---
layout: post
title: "Review: A Sicilian Romance"
itemauthor: Ann Radcliffe
tags: ["Four Stars"]
rating: 4
---

I debated whether I could call this one speculative fiction, or if I should declare it a deviation from my sword-and-spaceship preference. It's certainly gothic horror, if [Wikipedia is to be believed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gothic_fiction). Speculative fiction includes horror, so in a technical sense, _A Sicilian Romance_ passes muster. But interpersonal drama defines the story far more than spookiness, so the label feels a bit weak. In the end, I decided to slap it on anyway, because there are scenes where people hear scary noises in the abandoned halls of an ancient castle, which is as quintessentially gothic horror as you can get.

_A Sicilian Romance_ tells the tale of the noble family that inhabits the castle of Mazzini. The house’s two daughters, Emilia and Julia, have been raised in relative isolation, since their mother is dead, and their father left years earlier with their brother, Ferdinand, for the sake of the boy’s education. When the father returns home with Ferdinand, his unfaithful wife, and a retinue of unfamiliar noblemen, Emilia and Julia’s quiet lives are upended. Meanwhile, they see strange lights in an abandoned wing of the castle, and hear unearthly moans through the floor, and begin to wonder if a ghost has joined them, too.

I love the beginning. It’s not original, at least by modern standards, but it has all the most engaging characteristics of gothic horror, and it executes them well. Julia falls in love with a man who happens to be the target of her stepmother’s affections. The stepmother, inevitably, plots to remove the girl from the picture. In the midst of this drama, the ghostly moans begin, and Julia and Emilia spend a lot of time panicking, fleeing, and, occasionally, fainting. It’s popcorn flick stuff, but not in a bad way. If it were a movie, you’d find it predictable, but you’d still be grinning when you left the theater.

There _are_ devices I hadn’t seen. The eerie manifestations surround an uninhabited wing of the castle, which no one can work out how to enter, and which happens to border Julia and Emilia’s quarters. This lets them witness all manner of untraceable creepiness, while being separated from its source by a mere hallway, and a scary-looking one, at that. Eventually, they find a way into the ruined rooms and fittingly forboding architecture of the abandoned wing, and seeing the place in all its shadowy, decaying glory makes their situation that much scarier. Having the girls stuck one cobweb-filled hallway from the abandoned wing is a clever twist, and helps the book earn its horror cred.

Unfortunately, the horror aspects take a backseat shortly after, and the tension that drives the earlier chapters goes with it. The shift comes when Julia is forced to flee the castle after <span class="spoiler">her father tries to marry her to a cruel but powerful duke, thanks to the machinations of his wife, who wants Julia’s lover for herself.</span> At this point, the drama migrates to Julia’s attempts to avoid capture, and the conflicts between the people, good and bad, who have a stake in her fate. This is fine, except the run-away-hide cycle repeats a _lot_, and it started to bore me a couple rounds in. I was most interested in the iteration where Julia <span class="spoiler">hides in a monastery while the abbot, ostensibly a servant of God, keeps changing his plans for her based on whatever boosts his ego at the moment. He ends up protecting her, but only because her father irritated him. It’s an interesting turn in a book that presents the virtues of godly behavior as a primary theme. I suppose Radcliffe understood that “godly behavior” and “godly authority” aren’t always the same.</span>

I also appreciate the demonstration—intentional or not—of how little agency women had in that time and culture. Julia’s constantly on the run because that’s the only way she can control her life. She can’t overpower the people who want to use her for their own purposes, but she can physically remove herself from them, so that’s what she does. Not bad for a delicate young lady who faints at the drop of a hat.

Still, I’d have preferred less escaping and more spectral horrors. Even when the focus returns to the castle’s abandoned wing, <span class="spoiler">we learn that the ghost isn’t real. The moans came from Julia and Emilia’s allegedly dead mother, who was locked up by their father years ago so he could remarry.</span> It’s not a bad resolution to the mystery, but it’s not as interesting as it could have been. Personally, I’d have preferred it if <span class="spoiler">there had been a true supernatural presence in the castle, since the horror-y parts of the book were so much fun.</span>

A lot of this comes down to taste, though, and possibly the incompatible expectations of a modern reader. I’d give _A Sicilian Romance_ three-and-a-half stars if I could, but alas, I didn’t code this blog to slice stellar cores in two, so I think it’s fair to give four. Not recommended for those easily bored, but a yes for anyone who likes tropey Victorian novels, and especially fainting ladies.
