---
layout: post
title: "Review: Carmilla"
itemauthor: Sheridan Le Fanu
tags: ["Five Stars"]
rating: 5
---

My first vampire novel was Stephen King’s _’Salem’s Lot_. It threw me into a full-blown vampire phase, during which I watched the classic ‘30s _Dracula_ movie and wrote a bunch of stories about spooky bloodsuckers. This ended when I learned that saying “I like vampire fiction” as a teenage girl in the late ‘00s implied things I didn’t mean to imply. I won’t discuss That Book here, because then this would become a That Book review, and there are more than enough of those.  Anyway, I like to think I’m not so ancient that books from my teenage years qualify as “old.” Suffice it to say that I wanted my vampires to be spooky bloodsuckers. I did not want them to be—not that.

Which isn’t to say that spooky and pretty can’t be intertwined. Everyone and their dog knows the combination’s common with vampires. _Dracula_ does it. So does _’Salem’s Lot_. But _Dracula_ lands solidly on the spooky side of the spooky-pretty border, and _’Salem’s Lot_ lives far enough into creepy-crawly territory that any glamour is a dim sparkle in the distance. That Book, of course, floored it into Pretty Land fifteen years ago and never looked back.

_Carmilla_ is the first book I’ve read that hits the border and sticks.

_Carmilla_ is the story of a young woman, Laura, who lives with her father in an isolated castle in Austria. One moonlit night, a carriage crashes at their doorstep, injuring one of its occupants, another young woman named Carmilla. Laura’s father agrees to let Carmilla recuperate at the castle. Laura is thrilled to have a companion, especially one as alluring as Carmilla. But Carmilla’s a less-than-average guest, and the longer she stays, the more Laura begins to fear her.

Carmilla, of course, is a vampire. That might not have jumped out to readers at the time of publication. The book predates _Dracula_ by twenty-six years, and I doubt the collective consciousness was as aware of vampires before the big guy hit the scene. But to a modern reader, there’s no suspense about her identity. The tension derives from her fixation on Laura, Laura’s conflicting feelings towards her, and the question of whether Laura will survive—and if she doesn’t, whether her death will be due more to Carmilla’s predatory persistence, or Laura's inability to defy Carmilla, since her vampire companion is so stunningly beautiful.

There are definite romantic connotations to Laura and Carmilla’s relationship. I didn’t know Victorian-era stories could be so overt about LGBT+ themes. The book earns bonus stars just for that. But it’s not only Laura who finds Carmilla entrancing. Every character who meets Carmilla is taken with her in some fashion, from the family servants to <span class="spoiler">General Spielsdorf, who pays for his mistake with his daughter’s life.</span> We’re reminded constantly of Carmilla’s irresistible physical attractiveness, in a way that’s reminiscent of…well, That Book. I mean, people take one look at her and fall in love. What more could you ask from a vampire romance?

And yet _Carmilla_ isn’t a romance. It’s a horror story wrapped in—and fed by—its romantic aspects. Mysterious deaths have been occurring throughout the vicinity of the castle, and we know Carmilla has something to do with them. She also has an imperious attitude and a vicious temper. This is not a vampire who’ll hold back because she caught a convenient case of sentiment. Plus, some of her scenes with Laura are legitimately terrifying. <span class="spoiler">The one where Laura wakes to find Carmilla standing next to her bed, only to flicker away, through the locked door, is prime chills-down-the-spine horror.</span> The constant hints of her true—and truly evil—nature are so frequent and compellingly executed that the reader can never mistake Carmilla for a romantic hero with a pair of sharp teeth. She’s a monster. Who happens to be beautiful. And neither of those characteristics contradicts the other.

“I was conscious of a love growing into adoration,” Laura tells the reader, “and also of abhorrence. This I know is paradox, but I can make no other attempt to explain the feeling.” That conflict permeates _Carmilla_, and it’s why _Carmilla_ works. It sells the vampire’s beauty and the vampire’s danger, and it doesn’t pull punches on either. It might even have convinced teenage me that pretty vampires can be spooky bloodsuckers, too.
